The Nation’s Stance on Reproductive Rights
================
MJ Lorino
2025-04-14

### Introduction

Reproductive rights have been heavily debated on in the US recently, and
that discourse is leaving many worried about their bodily autonomy and
safety. The right to choose an abortion and the legality of it is the
main argument taking place, with people taking moral and scientific
stances to argue whichever side they are defending.

First, lets take a look at four countries with the highest rates/counts
of abortion: The U.S., Russia, China, and India. This shows the high end
of abortions on the globe, all of which are non-spontaneous (Unplanned
abortions, happens later in pregnancy).

``` r
plot1
```

![](Project-2----Reproductive-Rights-_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-2-1.png)<!-- -->

Some information needed before analyzing this graph: There is a large
gap of missing information for India, where there are missing years in
between 2008-2015, so the steep increase is only an approximation of the
rise in the number of abortions in India.

### Rising Insights

As we can see, the sheer amount of abortions is shocking to see, and
this visualization raises questions about what affects these numbers,
why they tend to go up or down at specific time periods. Another inquiry
one might have is if the country’s culture and customs affect the number
of abortions taking place, for we know right now in the U.S., the debate
about reproductive rights and the actions being taken is certainly
affecting whether people have access to abortions, safe ones anyway.

Now, let’s look at how perspectives of people surveyed in the U.S., on
the topic of the legality of abortions, whether they believe it should
be legal in any case, some cases, or not at all. This should show us
some sense of the balance between opinions, and that may or may not lead
to correlations with further data.

``` r
plot2
```

![](Project-2----Reproductive-Rights-_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-4-1.png)<!-- -->

Now let’s take a look at some major events in Reproductive Rights U.S.
History:

``` r
plot3
```

![](Project-2----Reproductive-Rights-_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-5-1.png)<!-- -->

Here are brief descriptions of these events from History.com:

- July 1, 1976: Planned Parenthood of Central Missouri v. Danforth
  strikes down parts of a Missouri statute requiring consent of a
  married woman’s husband or a minor’s parent before she can receive an
  abortion.

- June 29, 1992: In Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v.
  Casey, the Supreme Court upholds its 1973 Roe v. Wade ruling, but the
  decision alters Roe, and also upholds abortion restrictions, giving
  states more authority to regulate the procedure.

- September 2, 1998: The FDA approves Preven, better known as the
  “morning after pill,” emergency contraception that, when taken within
  72 hours of unprotected sex, causes a 75 percent reduction in the risk
  of pregnancy.

- January 18, 2006: The Supreme Court finds in Ayotte v. Planned
  Parenthood of Northern New England that a New Hampshire statute
  requiring parental consent prior to an abortion is unconstitutional as
  it lacks a medical emergency exception.

- March 23, 2010: The Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, is
  enacted. It includes a mandate that any FDA-approved birth control
  method be available to those with insurance with no copay or
  deductible.

- June 24, 2022: The Supreme Court’s 6-3 decision in Dobbs v. Jackson
  Women’s Health Organization overturns Roe v. Wade. The ruling leaves
  abortion laws up to the states.

- July 13, 2023: The FDA approves a birth control pill, called Opill, to
  be sold without a prescription for the first time in the United
  States.Its approval stands to broaden access to contraception, as it
  removes the requirement for a physician-issued prescription.

  If we look closely, we can see that all of these events succeed
  positive changes in public opinion about abortion, most noticeably the
  rise of the “Legal under any (case)” line around 1990, and then the
  upholding (yet adjustment) of Roe v. Wade takes place. Though one
  event is different from the others. If we look at the 2nd to last
  major event, the overturning of Roe v. Wade, we see a steep rise of
  support for the full legality of access to abortions and a decrease in
  support for both full illegality and legality in some cases. This
  opposition of public support and the choice of the Supreme Court isn’t
  what we’d expect from the trend that’s been set from the data before,
  which is why I want to finally investigate how people’s satisfaction
  with current state of the nation’s policies on abortion.

``` r
plot4
```

![](Project-2----Reproductive-Rights-_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-7-1.png)<!-- -->

### Key Insight

Clearly, people have grown very dissatisfied with the policies on
abortion, especially recently with the spike near 2020, which is most
likely correlated to the overturning of Roe v. Wade in 2022. That
dissatisfaction can be explained by the dilemma we faced earlier, where
even though public support of legal abortions increased, the Supreme
Court overturns Roe v. Wade which further reduces protections on
reproductive rights and in turn bodily autonomy. Though many people
believe that abortion should be legal in some sense whether fully or
with limitations, it’s undeniable that there is still a large chunk of
people who disagree, and some of those people are in positions of power.
Luckily for us, we have the power to choose who is in power and who gets
to decide what we have as our policies, but we can’t do it alone, and we
can’t back down.

### Call to Action

The main issue that’s presented is that the issue of abortion rights
isn’t something that we can solve with individual activities, but we
need to rely on our communities to vote for these reproductive rights.
We must use the power we have, and use our votes to choose people who
will support the right to have that bodily autonomy. We cannot be idle
and waste our voices either. Call, email, sign petitions, do what you
can to make your voice known with many others so that we can see the
change we want in this world. We can see the dissatisfaction that’s
transpiring, we just need to realize that we still have a say, and take
action.

### Data Sources

I found all of my data from Kaggle, and I found lots of information on
History.com and other various websites pertaining reproductiver rights
and information on abortions.
